Well, I live in your studio.
It is my uncle, D.A. Williams, who probably heard of, referred to, what he brought Joseph
Herman to Austria-Germany.
And when Herman first came here, he stayed with him in the cottage in Audfell Street.
And it was from there that he took the fancy to the world of Austria-Germany.
So he was my mother's brother.
My uncle then became the, eventually over many years, owned the studio and added the
studio to his home.
When he came, it was 1945, then he was about 18 months in the Pennabonk den.
He stayed about three weeks with my uncle in this little cottage, coming at first for
just a few weeks holiday.
But he took a fancy to the people that he'd met when they went pubbing or met people in
the street.
Everybody seemed friendly.
So I'm told, and so he thought he would stay a little longer.
And he then went to the Pennabonk inn, where they'd been for a drink, and stayed in a
rented, what we call the ballroom, other times called the ballroom, a large room.
Nothing has ever been a ballroom in a pub, very top floor.
And he stayed there for a few, I think about a year.
He saw this place, the studio, we now call it the studio, but it wasn't called the studio
then, looking out of the window of the Pennabonk, the side window, he saw it amongst the weeds.
I think he bought it from the Gulf Estate.
It was, it was at the time some sort of storage.
I don't know quite who would use it as storage, but it was some sort of storage, wartime
storage, but foodstuff.
And before that it had been a pub for like three years.
You were to tell me earlier on about the different renovations that you've done to the property.
Can you go through how much this building has changed since Joseph found it?
Well Joseph changed it a bit because he added an extension to the pop factory rooms where
he would have had his studio, he had his studio.
And then the extension was a further room at the back, bedroom upstairs, and a bathroom
at the showroom downstairs.
So he would have added the extension.
As time went by, I went to both the building, he then changed things like putting different
flooring, the flooring and the extension, and putting the staircase that was an adivine
before.
So over the years then we have arrived, the walls were substandard and therefore had to
be, I couldn't support the roof so we did lots of replaced windows and things like that.
Really, just the size of the studio room.
And that's where we're sitting now.
Which I did really regret but we didn't have a fortune at the time.
Not now either.
We never liked it at all.
But it was such an interesting building.
It was interesting during my uncle's time actually because he added some finer points,
you know, what I am, suspended ceilings and documented a little bit.
I was always regretted not having a character.
And we saw villages of the Rortyne staircase.
Really, it was there before but the Rortyne wasn't there before.
It was for Herman to store his canvases in a loft.
So sorry.
You see the building is almost in two, isn't it?
Two parts to it.
Yes, really.
Can you describe the building today?
Well, it's more of a conventional dwelling than it was in the past.
Unfortunately, it is more of a conventional dwelling.
How did you actually meet Joseph?
Well, I met him obviously through my family, my auntie.
But that's really when I met him in North Fuller Street.
But I was only ten years of age so I was not so taken much, what is it, this strange couple.
Strange, unusual.
That's what I like to call them.
And that their accents were different.
Joseph's aunt, Katrice, his wife.
What was your, if you can remember really, what was your image of them before when you did meet them?
You mentioned that they were strange.
I was a pretty busy little girl.
I was always, not staying for very long.
I can't recall telling my mum how they were strange.
And that they were dramatic clocks.
I remember the dramatic long black clocks.
In fact, they must have made quite an impact because I still love a clock.
Yes, I think they impact their confidence.
They were different, they were very different.
Not so much confidence, I don't know.
But certainly they were communicative.
Made an effort to communicate.
Even with awkward ten year olds.
Interested in that, interested in everything.
Did your relationship change over time?
Yes, when you're an adolescent you don't get much time when you talk about yourself.
I remember meeting them in a cinema.
We had a cinema.
And they would sit, there were chelins in the front stalls.
Where all the young children sat and were very noisy.
And then there were running nines, there were running sixes at the back.
And the running nines upstairs in the back.
You can tell a long story.
And I always, I can't understand why Joel and Katra always sit in the chelins of the children.
So they stood up because they were not afraid to be different.
Thinking about it now, they were not going to be who they were going to be in the conventions or whatever.
I felt that was a freedom about them.
Can you describe, if we look at more us again lights now,
can you describe us again like in Joseph's day?
Oh dear.
The mines were tight.
My father was a farmer.
Many people have heard about miners.
I lived very close to the dead on a farm.
Evacuees, I can't remember, this is the end of the time that you had evacuees.
I obviously remember it as a very happy, very happy day.
An interesting day, an interesting, very happy day.
But Katra was also a farmer as well.
In the village, in the miners.
Do you think, did this again change when Joseph arrived?
I think that's a pretty dramatic statement.
I don't know if it changed or not much.
Perhaps having heard what my family say, what my marital answer,
that answer is something that I tried to emulate and not all that successfully,
that like-minded people came together.
So there was an interest in the, not so much in the visual arts,
but there was an interest, there were interest in discussion groups.
So looking back, I think, my family would be involved and would be going to discussion groups
and would be interested in the news and interested in what's going on in current affairs, in literature.
And I know, I can remember, would provoke a lot of laughter.
They had a book reading club, of course it wasn't a club,
it was just coming together, Mr. George, I was in that, and he'd take us home.
Where they read us classics and it would perhaps be called a prejudice or something.
And they would all wait for George to read.
They would all be actually hysterical because George would read in this Polish Jewish accent, you know.
So they were, this is something I'm dying to emulate, but I can, they were interested in lots of things.
They were not narrow-minded or, I don't know, it is fine to, it's like you've got minds.
And they were stimulating people when they were interested in things.
And I thought we actually lost that when I think of the last, I don't know, when I over dramatized time.
So do you think that was lost when Joseph left?
No, I don't think it was actually, maybe he'd been a catalyst in some way because he had something of what to offer.
And I don't think up to that point perhaps some, you know, people may not have heard of Todd Starr or Bozak.
So perhaps he stretched, stretched them a little bit.
But as they also stretched him, so he did describe him.
He introduced him also to radical child, you know.
Because he was very curious. I remember there being very, very curious people here in the country.
She wanted to, I wonder if she wanted to come to a funeral, she wanted to go to a Welsh chapel and do a funeral service.
And she came to the farm and she came in a red dress.
And my mother was mortified. She came in a red dress.
So my mother had a coat she thought an awful lot about, so it was an Astrakhan coat.
So she lent her the Astrakhan coat and put over the red dress to go to the funeral.
Did they have any political influence in the area?
I think they came together, again, just me, I think they came together because of a political interest.
I think that's what introduced everyone, was we brought them together.
I think that they came, my uncle and I went to meet them in Brecon, they went on holiday in Brecon,
because of the Contest in the Communist Party.
So, that again was the start.
They were very, very politically aware.
But as many as, well anyway.
Did they get involved with the government?
I think so, yeah.
I think they certainly got involved with discussion groups, or the event at the Beverly Hall of plays.
Yes.
And again, looking maybe at Joseph's work, do you think he captured the spirits of this again, wife?
Of the people in the industry of the area.
Yes, sometimes I think so, he's sombre.
But I just love his work, I mean, sombre or not.
He's got a drawing there, I think that's of my aunt.
And she was so thankful I saved it, my aunt, I just love it so much.
She was mentally handicapped, and she was on the file, and I think that really captures the spirit.
I think that really captures it.
But it's sad in a way as well.
But to me, of course, obviously, I see it as a sadness.
It's a lady who was in...
He says in this interview that he says something in this interview,
and that happened to me quite recently, it was still a joke.
And it was called the 6th of October, 1945.
It is maybe clarity from the speakers, my aunt, Joseph Herman, and the history of Williams.
And the 12th of October was transmitted Pacific service.
Pacific service, what?
What he says about...
What he says about Ashwagandhas and why he came.
It says here, yes, I came here from London, but more interesting are the reasons why I came.
For quite a long time I had wanted to draw and paint Maynard.
But I couldn't make up my mind which place to choose.
This is the reason he came to Ashwagandhas.
But the bombardment of London destroyed the hospital which my wife was attending for treatment at the time,
and I was forced to make up my mind quickly.
A friend gave me the address of a hospital in this district, and so we came down here to Bethlehem.
Originally it was only for a month, but it was a really steep climb.
It wasn't the Maynard he says that really attracted him first, but it was the actual surroundings.
He found that compared with other Maynard localities in Belgium, particularly the first two,
that there was no colour.
There was colour in the building, there was colour in the stone.
He still got it in the summer.
It's coming everywhere in November.
It didn't come until the great rains, and the sun was shining.
You could see the colour in the building.
So he says that he long wanted to get Maynard, but was attracted in the rest of the structure, the location itself.
And do you believe that he captured this in the Maynard?
Yes, yes I do. Not the colour.
Actually not the colour.
I think he captured something.
I love his figures.
I have found them very sombre, with those two women gossiping there.
They're so...
I can't forget.
We call them a material in the sense that they...
You know what they are, and you can almost join in their conversation.
I feel I know what they're talking about.
The dramatic and bold. I love their boldness.
And if you look at that painting as well, that drawing, they look at you.
I think he looks...
He looks sad and sombre and dignified.
Yes, it is the dignity of the Maynard.
Did you ever meet the Boomsbury set, the group he came around with?
I saw lots of people, but I wouldn't have known at the time where they were.
Lots of people really, and I did still join.
I wasn't cheered on that often, really.
As an adolescent, you've got many other things to pursue.
To give people that didn't meet Joseph Hellman the understanding of who he was
and what he meant to the people in this degree.
Is there any particular story that comes to mind, any kind of antidote?
I actually use his own work, his own words.
It's very complimentary, but it talks about his colour.
It also talks about how friendly the people were.
You're no stranger here, and called him Joe Bach affectionately.
He was known as Joe Bach.
I always start off with saying that he thought...
He was a very famous man, very famous artist.
He thought so much of us together was a special dream, and he used his own words.
Do you have a general feeling of other people in the area about Joseph?
At a certain age.
I remember him for his eccentricities, I think, of dress.
They used to call this place the Pink House, because it was obviously a pale tenacotter.
You're sure that your painting has a pale tenacotter.
So in the 40s.
Especially in the Breshoff Halles.
People asked me, oh, you're living in the Pink House.
So I don't know if there's someone else who said, my mother used to wash the sheets.
Have you interviewed her?
Betty Hawking.
Oh, Betty Davis.
She said that they had red sheets.
So they were not afraid of different people.
People seemed to have a lot of affection for people.
Do you think they were a bit reluctant at first, when they first came here, a little bit?
At the time, no.
Perhaps it's because perhaps they were invited here in the first instance.
Invited here.
And they knew that the mining community was very strong.
And they were invited here by members of the mining community, by people who played prominent roles.
There was a passport, wasn't it, and having a very welcoming time.
I think there must have been some influence.
Because I also like the Breshoff Halles.
But he has the talent.
I like the Breshoff Halles.
So, wouldn't I, if it hadn't been for them, I don't know, really.
I think there must have been tremendous influence.
Because I was extremely proud of them, proud of my husband and my husband.
Because they were different.
And when they were young, they were very different.
It seemed to be glamour, it wasn't glamour.
But I mean, it seemed to be different and they had a glamourous, I think it was a little bit of a mess.
And then there were books, although...
I had a lot of books as well.
But I needed to inherit any.
So, so many.
So, if he indeed influenced them, then certainly they influenced me.
Obviously they influenced me politically.
So they influenced me specifically.
Okay, now I can see it.
Yes?
Psychology, sociology, literature.
They were very...
I mean, would that person think that the miners would not normally be into it all?
He?
No, no.
Right.
I think they would have been motivated by the...
Politically motivated anyway.
Before he came, politically motivated.
And it happened about the same time that we did...
The Silent Village was filmed here.
It was...
Have you heard of Silent Village?
Silent Village, what is that?
I don't know whether I begin to tell you about that.
This is what this interview with Tarvan Davis is actually all about.
It's that...
And my uncle, I think he was the chairman of some lodges at the time.
And he talks about...
Tarvan Davis talks about really...
He says on the radio that you will have seen Kungier,
which is the village of Kungier, which is part of the Strickland.
You will have seen it.
The picturesque village of Kungier, he describes it.
But...
And it comes as a small rural appendage, which is supposed to be, but it is.
I was rigged on this.
Just rows of cottages and small houses.
Kungier is famous.
And it's false papers.
Probably many of the listeners at the moment have seen it.
Yes, you may have seen it.
Not under its own name, of course, but representing another village,
the name of which really resounded throughout the world not so very long ago,
the village of Lydysing in Czechoslovakia,
where one of the most ruthless of Nazi crimes of the whole world took place.
Well, did you see anything here in the Strickland nice that the film depicting,
you know, the undying village of the people of Lydysing
and what the Nazis did to them was actually made?
And that's what this interview is really about.
Why did they come to a Strickland nice where the director was Humphrey Jennings,
the famous director now, so to say, of documentaries in particular?
So my son tells me.
And my auntie says that he was notified by the miners' head office in Cardiff
saying that Humphrey Jennings or the crown filming was coming down to see them
because he was looking for a location to film the tragedy of Lydysing.
And I suppose my auntie's job was to look for, to get in touch with the Czech delegation in London
to give them detailed information about villages around here that met standards in Lydysing.
And Jennings came here and he liked us from here and liked the miners
and he filmed the southern villages.
In fact, he had said that one of the things that Strickland was becoming part of the political side of things,
that Strickland was supposed to be, was a communist, if anyone remembers, strong communist party here.
But links to the chapel in the communist party, so that you found that deacons in the chapel,
no, not capitals, no, performance chapels, were also members of the communist party, unopened here.
And you found that fascinating, unexpected.
So I think it is politics.
Maybe that's influenced me throughout my life too because I've spent a lifetime in the Labour Party at least.
Oh my gosh. I'm the thing about you now, I'm the thing about you.
I'm just thinking when Joseph moved back to London and left the studio, your uncle and auntie acquired the building,
did they buy building of Joseph?
Well, yes, according to my aunt and auntie, they bought it from, not from Joseph, but from Catria.
It was Catria and two were parted by them.
There were both of them living in London, living in different places in London.
He was living, I think, in the Edith Roadhouse in Fulham and she was, I think she had a flat.
You had a park or something.
And you mentioned that your uncle and auntie owned a farm before that.
You know, I lived in a farm, it was like Ben's place.
And the breakers were ready, but I can't be doing the makes.
Do you know why they wanted to buy this building?
They were, they were now in London.
They were very sentimental, I think they wanted a home in Stoke-Ellis anyway.
I think that the home, they were very happy here, their friendship with, friendship with John.
Very, very happy, this is very exciting times for them.
I should have mentioned that they had some wonderful associations with the building.
I know that my uncle did that when we came at weekends and holidays,
we were always pottering and doing things.
He did the staircase there and he would try your place and he did lots of things himself.
He made the clothes.
And that was like...
And it required more of a garden, so the garden we were drawing by buying house opposite.
And the gardens are in front, so it required a piece to go so that there's land around.
Or a three-site.
So, yes, I think they became very sentimental about it.
And they renamed it the studio.
It was called Tatcha.
I want to call it a factory pop.
But we listened to it.
And how did you feel when you acquired this building?
I inherited it.
So one of six, four were of my immediate family, including me.
And we bought the other two out of cousins.
I was very happy to have it because I spent many, many happy years visiting the place
during my aunt and auntie's lifetime.
Especially in the last ten years with my aunt before she died.
And in fact we used to call the place the Clemling because, you know...
And we should have called it something else because we're men.
We're men.
We live in Farty.
We all come over here.
But the world's too right to the glass of wine.
My bottle's of wine to fill it.
So we were wonderful times here.
I've locked his things, you know.
May it continue.
Yes.
I stopped in the armadillo and said, Joe, have you seen Peggy and Dave or something like that?
He looked at you.
That is because perhaps he was an artist.
He really looked.
You could see him looking.
Yes.
That's one thing to remember, isn't it?
Because it is dead things.
Observing.
I've never noticed anyone else, but that.
Closely observing everything.
Perhaps not only the way they looked at him.
Into the soul.